# 1. Shell tutorial Introduction

## 1.1 Why big data engineer need to learn shell?
1. Understand the shell written by other people(e.g. admin system).
2. Improve your producibility by writing cluster management shell.

## 1.2 What is a shell? 
A shell is a computer program which exposes an operating system's services 
to a human user or other program. In general, operating system shells use 
either a command-line interface (CLI) or graphical user interface (GUI), 
depending on a computer's role and particular operation. It is named a shell 
because it is the outermost layer around the operating system.

In a linux distribution, you can check the available shell interpreters by using following command.

```shell
cat /etc/shells 

# output looks like
/bin/sh
/bin/bash
/bin/tcsh
/bin/csh

```

You can notice we have 4 different shell interpreters. 

If you want to take a closer look at the bash interpreter, you could see that sh points to bash. As a result, the default shell is bash.
```shell
ll /bin/ | grep bash

lrwxrwxrwx.   1 root root           4 Apr 29  2020 sh -> bash
```


## 1.3 A simple shell example

The shell script uses .sh as file extension. Following script is a simple example. The first line specifies which shell
interpreter that the script will use. This script will first create a file, and write some text to the file.

```shell
#!/bin/bash

cd /tmp
touch test.txt
# 
echo "I love cls" >> test.txt
```


## 1.4 Run a shell script

There are two ways to run a shell script:
- use sh or bash to call the script: sh/bash <script-name>.sh
- call script directly: ./<script-name>.sh

### 1.4.1 Use sh or bash to call the script

```shell
# use relative path
sh source/simple_writer.sh

# use absolue path
sh /home/pliu/git/ShellTutoForBigData/source/simple_writer.sh
```
You can notice that, we don't need to add X privilege to the script acl to run it. Because it's sh or bash that runs the
script. 

### 1.4.2 Call script directly

```shell
# run the following command, you will receive an error bash: ./source/simple_writer.sh: Permission denied
./source/simple_writer.sh

# add the X permission and retry the above command
chmod a+x source/simple_writer.sh

# run the script with absolute path
/home/pliu/git/ShellTutoForBigData/source/simple_writer.sh
```

Note you need to add the execution privilege to the script to make it runnable by himself. Because in this mode, the 
script execute itself, not by sh or bash.