# 2. Variables in shell

## 2.1 System variables

Below are some useful system variables. They are set by the OS. You can use ${Var-name} to get their values

- USER: The current logged in user.
- HOME: The current user’s home directory.
  
- SHELL: This describes the shell that will be interpreting any commands you type in. In most cases, this will be 
  bash by default, but other values can be set if you prefer other options.
  
- TERM: This specifies the type of terminal to emulate when running the shell. Different hardware terminals can be 
  emulated for different operating requirements. You usually won’t need to worry about this though.
- PATH: A list of directories that the system will check when looking for commands. When a user types in a command, 
  the system will check directories in this order for the executable.

- PWD: The current working directory. 
  
- OLDPWD: The previous working directory. This is kept by the shell in order to switch back to your previous 
  directory by running cd -.

```shell
# show the value of PATH in the current shell
echo $PATH

# show all the variable values in the current shell
set
```

## 2.2 Custom variables

You can declare your own variables inside a shell. But you must follow the following rules:
1. The name of the variable can contain alphabets, digits, and "_", but can't start with digits. In general, all letter must be
   in capital letter
   
2. No space is allowed on both sides of the =.
3. If the value of a variable contains space, the value must be protected with " or '
4. All variables have string as default type. As a result, we can't do arithmetic operations inside a variable. 

Below are some example

```shell
# declare a variable
A=5
echo $A
# it prints 5

B=6
echo $B
# it prints 6

# all variables are strings
C=$A+$B
echo $C
# it prints 5+6

# Change the value of A, when we assign a new value, the old value is overwritten.
A=10
echo $A
# it prints 10

echo $C
# it still prints 5+6, not 10+6. 

```

### 2.2.1 Delete a variable and readonly variable

We can delete a variable by using keyword **unset**.

```shell
unset A
echo $A
```

We can declare a readonly variable by using keyword **readonly**. When a variable is readonly, we can no longer modify 
its value or delete(unset) it.

```shell
readonly D=2

# try following command, you will receive "bash: D: readonly variable"
D=3

# try unset, you will receive "bash: unset: D: cannot unset: readonly variable"
unset D


```

### 2.2.2 Deal with space in variables
Space is the command separator in bash. So if the value contains string, it will stop the variable command, and consider 
the string after space is another command.

```shell
#try below, you will receive "bash: world: command not found...". Space is the command separator in bash. 
STR=hello world

# the correct way to include space is using ""
STR="hello world"
echo $STR

```

### 2.2.3 Make a variable global

By default, all variables are local, which is callable only inside the shell where its declared. To make a variable 
global, you need to use the keyword **export**

```shell
# Add echo $STR into the source/simple_writer.sh and run the script, you will notice nothing happens.
# Run export first, and rerun the script, you will see the hello world in output
export STR
```


## 2.3 Special variables