# 4 Process control

## 4.1 Condition

General expresion : [ condition ] (the space between [ ] and condition is mandatory).

All non-empty condition are considered true, empty conditions are considered as false

```shell
sh source/condition.sh
```

## 4.2 Common bool expresion

### 4.2.1 compare two integer
To compare integers, we have following operators:

- -lt : less than
  
- -le : less equal

- -eq : equal				
  
- -gt : greater than
- -ge : greater equal	
  
- -ne : Not equal

```shell
sh source/compare_int.sh
```

### 4.2.2 check file properties 
We can use following operator to check a file's ACL

- -r : read
  
- -w : write

- -x : execute

We can use following operator to check file type and existence

- -f : check if it is a file
- -e : check if a file/directory exists		
- -d : check if it is a directory

### 4.2.3 Combine multiple bool expression

We can use the two following operator to combine multiple conditions:
- && : and two bool expression. It evaluates the value of the first expresion, if its ture, it continues to evaluate the second
  expression. otherwise, return false
  
- || : or two bool expression. It evaluates the value of the first expresion, if its false, it continues to evaluate the second
  expression. otherwise, return true.
  
## 4.3 If statement

If then else is the basic condition check statement. In bash, it has the following general form. Note the else statement
and elif statement can be omitted.

```text
if TEST-COMMAND1
then
  STATEMENTS1
elif TEST-COMMAND2
then
  STATEMENTS2
else
  STATEMENTS3
fi
```

Below is an example of if statement

```shell
sh source/if_example.sh 
```

## 4.4 Case statement

The case statement is generally used to simplify the complex conditionals when you have multiple different choices. 
Using the case statement instead of nested if statements will help you make your bash scripts more readable and 
easier to maintain.

The Bash case statement takes the following form:

```text

case EXPRESSION in

  PATTERN_1)
    STATEMENTS
    ;;

  PATTERN_2)
    STATEMENTS
    ;;

  PATTERN_N)
    STATEMENTS
    ;;

  *)
    STATEMENTS
    ;;
esac
```

- Each case statement starts with the **case** keyword, followed by the **case expression** and the **in** keyword. 
  The statement ends with the **esac** keyword.
- You can use multiple patterns separated by **the | operator**. **The ) operator** terminates a pattern list.
- A pattern can have special characters .
- A pattern and its associated commands are known as a clause.
- Each clause must be terminated with ;;. like the break in java case statement.
- The commands corresponding to the first pattern that matches the expression are executed.
- It is a common practice to use the **wildcard symbol (\*)** as a final pattern to define the default case. This pattern will always match.
- If no pattern is matched, the **return status is zero**. Otherwise, **the return status is the exit status of the 
  executed commands**.
  
Below is an example

```shell
# enter a country name such as San Marino. Then see the result
sh source/case_example.sh 
```

## 4.5 For loop
The for loop iterates over a list of items and performs the given set of commands. In bash, it has the following 
general form

```text
for item in [LIST]
do
  [COMMANDS]
done
```

### 4.5.1 loop over string list

In the example below, the loop will iterate over each item in the list of strings.

```shell
sh source/for_string_list.sh 
```

### 4.5.2 loop over an integer range

You can use the sequence expression to specify a range of numbers or characters by defining a start and the end 
point of the range. The sequence expression takes the following form:

```text
{START..END..INCREMENT}
```
The INCREMENT can be omitted, if omitted, it uses 1 as the default Increment value.
Below range start from 0 to 20 include with 5 as increment.
```shell
for i in {0..20..5}
do
  echo "Number: $i"
done
```

### 4.5.3 For loop array elements

You can also use the for loop to iterate over an array of elements.

In the example below, we are defining an array named BOOKS and iterating over each element of the array.

```shell

BOOKS=('In Search of Lost Time' 'Don Quixote' 'Ulysses' 'The Great Gatsby')

for book in "${BOOKS[@]}"; do
  echo "Book: $book"
done
```

### 4.5.4 For loop input parameter
We can use $* and "$@" to get the input parameters as a list, note if we remove the "" from the $@, it will behave like 
$*. For more details, visite section 2.3.3.

```shell
sh source/for_input_params.sh 2 a b 'c d'
```

## 4.6 while loop

The while loop is used to performs a given set of commands an unknown number of times as long as the given condition evaluates to true.

The Bash while loop takes the following form:

```text
while [CONDITION]
do
  [COMMANDS]
done
```

Below is an example of while loop

```shell
i=0

while [ $i -le 2 ]
do
  echo Number: $i
  ((i++))
done
```