# 5. Functions

A Bash function is essentially a set of commands that can be called numerous times. The purpose of a function is to 
help you make your bash scripts more readable and to avoid writing the same code repeatedly. Compared to most 
programming languages, Bash functions are somewhat limited.

## 5.1 Define a function
Below is the general way to define a function in bash.
```text
# Popular form
function_name () {
  commands
}


```

There is another way to define a function, but less popular, and preferred.
```text
function function_name {
  commands
}

# one line version
function function_name { commands; }
```
Some important point to be noted when use functions:
- The commands between the curly braces ({}) are called the body of the function. The curly braces must be 
  separated from the body by spaces or newlines.

- Defining a function doesn’t execute it. To invoke a bash function, simply use the function name. Commands 
  between the curly braces are executed whenever the function is called in the shell script.
- Variable has different scope when declare inside and outside a function. When a local variable is set inside the 
  function body with the same name as an existing global variable, it will have precedence over the global variable.
  Global variables can be changed from within the function
- The function definition must be placed before any calls to the function.
- When using single line “compacted” functions, a semicolon ; must follow the last command in the function.
- Always try to keep your function names descriptive.

```shell
# check the variable value, based on different scope
sh source/function_example.sh 
```

### 5.1.1 Return values

Unlike functions in “real” programming languages, Bash functions don’t allow you to return a value when called. 
When a bash function completes, its return value is the status of the last statement executed in the function, 0 for 
success and non-zero decimal number in the 1 - 255 range for failure.

The return status can be specified by using the **return** keyword, and you can get its value only by calling the 
variable **$?**. The return statement terminates the function. You can think of it as the function’s exit status .

## 5.2 Builtin functions
Shell provides already many builtin functions that we use every day. You can get a full list from 
[here](http://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/focal/man7/bash-builtins.7.html)

Below we will show some popular function that we will use to manage the big data cluster

### 5.2.1 basename function

The **basename command prints the last element of a file path**. This is especially useful in bash scripts 
where the file name needs to be extracted from a long file line.

It has two general form:

```text
# note when you add a suffix, you can not use option anymore
basename filePath Suffix

basename option filePath
```

Below are some examples
```shell
# by default, it keeps only the last string
basename /home/pliu/git/ShellTutoForBigData/source/case_example.sh 

# if we set the suffix = .sh, it returns case_example, 
basename /home/pliu/git/ShellTutoForBigData/source/case_example.sh .sh 

# note if the suffix equals or is longer than the returned string,
# the suffix is ignored.
basename /home/pliu/git/ShellTutoForBigData/source/case_example.sh case_example.sh

```

Some useful options:

- -s suffix: remove the trailing suffix from the file
- -a: apply basename to multiple filepath

```shell
basename -a -s suffix /home/pliu/git/ShellTutoForBigData/source/Filepath1_suffix /tmp/toto.suffix
```

### 5.2.2 dirname function

The **dirname** command in Linux prints a file path with its final component removed. This basically gives you the 
directory path from the file path.

It has the general form:

```text
dirname [option] filePath 
```

Some example:

```shell
dirname /home/pliu/git/ShellTutoForBigData/source/case_example.sh
```

### 5.2.3 read function

read is a bash built-in command that reads a line from the standard input (or from the file descriptor) and split 
the line into words. The first word is assigned to the first name, the second one to the second name, and so on.

The general syntax takes the following form:

```text
read [options] [name...]
```

Some popular functions:

- -p "prompt text"：allow you to specify a prompt string before read function executes
- -t：specify a wait time limit for user input. If no input, after wait time, exit script with code 127
- -a [array_name]: Assign inputs into an array

```shell
# below is an example of -t and -p option
sh source/read_with_time_limit.sh

# get exit status code
echo $?

# below is an example of -a 
sh source/read_to_array.sh 

```

#### Custom separator
Note the default separator is space, if your input text use a different separator, you need to change the default to
read the text correctly.

below is an example of custom separator
```shell
# use Linux::is:awesome as input
sh source/read_with_custom_delimitor.sh 

```

You can use **more than one delimiter** to split the line. When specifying multiple delimiters, assign the characters 
to the **IFS variable without a space between them**.

Here is an example using _ and - as delimiters:

```shell
# use Linux-is_awesome as input
sh source/read_with_multiple_delimitor.sh
```
