# 6. Important tools

There are many utilities available in Linux and Unix systems that allow you to process and filter text files. In this 
tutorial, we will learn some of the most popular tools:
- cut: 


## 6.1 Cut

**cut allows you to cut parts of lines from specified files or piped data and print the result to standard output**. 
It can be used to cut parts of a line by delimiter, byte position, and character.

The syntax for the cut command is as follows:

```text
cut OPTION... [FILE]...
```

The options that tell cut whether to use a delimiter, byte position, or character when cutting out selected portions 
the lines are as follows:

- -f (--fields=LIST) - Select by specifying a field(column), a set of fields, or a range of fields. 
- -b (--bytes=LIST) - Select by specifying a byte, a set of bytes, or a range of bytes.
- -c (--characters=LIST) - Select by specifying a character, a set of characters, or a range of characters.

**You can use one, and only one of the options listed above.**

Other options are:

- -d (--delimiter): Specify a delimiter that will be used instead of the default “TAB” delimiter.
- --complement: Complement the selection. When using this option cut displays all bytes, characters, 
  or fields except the selected.
- -s (--only-delimited): By default cut prints the lines that contain no delimiter character. When this option is 
  used, cut does not print lines not containing delimiters.
- --output-delimiter: The default behavior of cut is to use the input delimiter as the output delimiter. This 
  option allows you to specify a different output delimiter string.
  
### 6.1.1 Cut by fields(Columns)

To specify the fields(Columns) that should be cut invoke the command with the -f option. 
When not specified, the default delimiter is “TAB”.

We can use range to specify which column that we want to select, following are some examples.

- 1 : Column 1
- 1,4,6: Column 1, 4 and 6
- 2-5: from column 2 to 5
- 3-: from column 3 to the end
- -4: from the beginning column to column 4

```shell
# we want the 1st and third column, with default delimiter
cut source/cut/test1.txt -f 1,3

# we want the 2nd and 4th column, with space as delimiter
cut source/cut/test2.txt -d " " -f 2,4

# we can also invert the return result by using option --complement. Below example will return all column except 2,4
cut source/cut/test2.txt -d " " -f 2,4 --complement

# we can also add an output delimiter 
cut source/cut/test2.txt -d " " -f 2,4 --output-delimiter='_'

# cut can use return value sent by |, below shows how to get the first two path in PATH
echo $PATH | cut -d: -f -2

```

### 6.1.2 Cut by Bytes and Characters

#### Context of bytes and characters 
One byte is 8 bits and can represent 256 different values. When the ASCII standard was established, it took into 
account all the letters, numbers, and symbols necessary to work with English. The ASCII character table has 
128 characters, and each character is represented by one byte. When computers started to become globally accessible, 
tech companies began to introduce new character encodings for different languages. For languages that have more than 
256 characters, a simple 1 to 1 mapping was not possible. This leads to different problems such as sharing documents 
or browsing websites, and a new Unicode standard that can handle most of the world’s writing systems was needed. 
UTF-8 was created to solve these problems. In UTF-8, not all characters are represented with 1 byte. Characters can 
be represented with 1 byte to 4 bytes.

#### Some example
As we explained before, different character may take different amount of byte to encode. In the following examples, 
we are using the ü character that takes 2 bytes.

```shell
# We will take the 5th byte character, because ü takes two, so it returns b
echo 'drüberspringen' | cut -b 5

# if we take 1 to 5, it returns drüb
echo 'drüberspringen' | cut -b 1-5
```

You can notice, it's not very practical to cut by bytes.

#### Cut by character

At the time of writing this article, the version of cut bundled in GNU coreutils doesn’t have an option to cut by 
characters. **When using the -c option, cut behaves the same as when using the -b option.**


## 6.2 sed 

Sed is the ultimate stream editor, it treats one row at a time. It copies the current row and store it in a buffer. Then
apply sed commands on this row to transform the current row. After transformation, it prints the result to the stdout. 
It repeats this process until the end of the file. **Note, it does not change the source file, unless you redirect the
output back to the source file**

SED supports regular expression which allows it to perform complex pattern matching.

The syntax for the cut command is as follows:

```text
sed OPTION 'command' FILE

```

It has many useful commands, we only list some of them here:
- a: append text after the matching line
 
- i: insert text before the matching line 
- d: delete text
- s: substitute text

### 6.2.1 Append text

You can append line by 
- providing a line number
- providing a pattern, all lines that match the pattern will have the new appended line after.

Below are some append examples with line number.

```shell
# append hello world after the 3rd line of the file test.txt
sed '3 a hello world' data/test.txt

# if the text you want to append contains ', you need to protect it with\, and change the quote to ""
sed "2 a I\'m learning linux" data/test.txt

# if you don't know the total line number of a file, you can use $ to append text to the end of the file
sed "$ a end_of_file" data/test.txt 
```

Below are some example with pattern matching
```shell
# append a line after all lines that contains linux.
sed '/linux/a appended_line' data/test.txt
```
### 6.2.2 Insert text
Insert is similar to Append, it adds text just before the matching line

Insert by using line number

```shell
# insert hello world before the 3rd line of the file test.txt
sed '3 i hello world' data/test.txt

# insert a row before the last line of the file
sed "$ i end_of_file" data/test.txt 
```

Insert by using pattern matching

```shell
# insert a line before all lines that contains linux.
sed '/linux/i appended_line' data/test.txt
```
### 6.2.3 Delete text

You can delete a line by
- providing a line number
- providing a pattern, all lines that match the pattern will be deleted


```shell
# delete the third line
sed '3 d' data/test.txt

# delete all lines that contains linux
sed '/linux/d' data/test.txt
```

### 6.2.4 Substitute text

Sed command is mostly used to replace the text in a file. It has the following general form:
```text
sed 's/regexp/replacement/[n occurrence]' file-name
```


The below simple sed command replaces the word “unix” with “linux” in the file. By default, it only changes the first
occurrence.
```shell
# note the learn.unix, .unix are not changed, because they don't match the pattern unix 
sed 's/unix/linux/' data/test.txt
```
**Replacing the occurrence of a pattern only on certain lines**
```shell
# do the replacement on the first line
sed '1 s/unix/linux/' data/test.txt

# do the replacement from the 1st to 3rd line
sed '1,3 s/unix/linux/' data/test.txt

# do the replacement from the 2nd to the end of file
sed '2,$ s/unix/linux/' data/test.txt
```

**Replacing the nth occurrence of a pattern in a file** : Use the /1, /2 etc flags to replace the first, second 
occurrence of a pattern in a line. 

```shell
# Below only changes the second occurrence, 
# note the output, only the third line has two occurrence.
sed 's/unix/linux/2' data/test.txt
```

**Replacing all the occurrence of the pattern in a line**

```shell
# use g as occurrence number, if you want to replace all occurrence.
sed 's/unix/linux/g' data/test.txt

```

**Replacing from nth occurrence to all occurrences in a line**

```shell
# 3 is the starting occurrence. Below command will replace third, fourth, ..., last occurrence of unix. 
sed 's/unix/linux/3g' data/test.txt
```

### 6.2.5 Multiple commands in one line

If you want to perform multiple transformation, you can use the option "-e"

```shell
# delete the second line, then replace all unix occurrence by linux
sed -e '2d' -e 's/unix/linux/g' data/test.txt 
```
